what can the United Nations do to end
Israel's war on Gaza the UN Chief has
pointed to clear violations of
international humanitarian law Israel
and its supporters refuse any talk of a
ceasefire so does diplomacy stand a
chance in Gaza this is inside
stor
[Music]
hello welcome to the program I'm Bernard
Smith diplomatic attempts to end
Israel's war on Gaza have so far failed
calls for a ceasefire an end to Israel's
bombardment of Palestinian homes or for
Hamas to release all its captives have
gone unanswered on Tuesday the UN
Security Council held an open debate on
the conflict in his address Secretary
General Antonio guz noted that the hamus
attacks of October the 7th did not occur
in a vacuum and should be viewed in
light of Decades of occupation his
comments prompted a furious reaction
from Israel and demands for his
resignation ultimately though all
permanent members of the UN Security
Council need to be on board for a
binding resolution to be passed and with
such deep divisions what role can the UN
play in ending the war plenty to discuss
with our guests but first this report
from
[Music]
sahill even War has rules those were the
words of Antonio guz the United Nations
Secretary General he was speaking at a
security Council open debate on the
Middle
East most of the discussions focused on
Israel's war on
Gaza ceras condemned the attacks Hamas
carried out in southern Israel on
October the 7th but he said he was
deeply concerned about clear violations
of international humanitarian law in
Gaza the Palestinian people have been
subjected to 56 years of suffocating
occupation they have seen their land
steadily divor by settlements and
plagued by violence their economy
stiffled their people displaced and
their homes demolished night Israel
responded by calling for his resignation
and its foreign minister Eli Cohen
canceled a planned meeting with him the
SG is blaming the victim you are blaming
Israel this is a pure blood liel this is
a pure blood liel and I think that the
Secretary General must
resign Russia China the United Arab
Emirates and others called for an end to
the conflict something absent from the
US draft
resolution the key Point here is the
need for a swift ceasefire the fact that
it was not included in the council draft
was a step in the wrong direction and
could be interpreted as Council support
for Israel's plan to conduct the ground
offensive in
Gaza the US says humanitarian pauses are
needed to allow Aid into Gaza but for
Palestinians that's not enough we are
here today to Stop The Killing to stop
the massacres being committed against
the Palestinian
people the ongoing
massacres being deliberately and
systematically and savagely perpetrated
by Israel the occupying power against
the Palestinian civilian population
under its illegal occupation Must Be
Stopped the international after several
sessions the UN Security Council has
been unable to pass a resolution on the
war and with such deep divisions between
members it begs the question how much
can the UN really achieve saril for
insight
story let's bring in our guests in
Istanbul is Richard folk a visiting
professor at isia University and a
former un special rapor for the occupied
Palestinian territories in Tel Aviv is
rapael Jerusalem a former Israeli
intelligence officer and security
analyst and in Manila is Chris gunnes a
former un relief and works agency
spokesperson who is speaking today in an
independent capacity a warm welcome to
you all and Chris I'll I'll start with
you how much influence can the UN have
when some of its most influential
members are not interested in a
ceasefire well the answer sadly is very
little and when you look at the Israeli
reaction to the very reasonable remarks
of the UN Secretary General who simply
said that there is a context of this
fighting that it didn't happen in a
vacuum and when you look at the fact
that the Israeli foreign Minister
immediately canceled a meeting with him
and Israel has now said it will refuse
to give visas um to Israeli official to
un officials including the highest
humanitarian in the UN system you have
to wonder when sens is going to Prevail
you have a situation where
diplomatically for making perfectly
reasonable remarks the UN Secretary
General finds himself rejected by one
side and on the ground unra the United
Nations relief and works Agency for
which I used to work finds itself
completely on its knees um it has
600,000 displaced people in its schools
all 13,000 of its staff have been
withdrawn to the South and um 35 of its
staff have been killed and 40 of its
installations have been hit so you know
unra is the only other massive service
provider apart from the Palestinian
Authority the Hamas authorities capable
of delivering Aid so in the humanitarian
sense and in a diplomatic sense the UN
finds itself completely marginalized
Richard is would you agree with that is
the UN powerless to do anything at the
moment in in in relation to
Gaza uh yes the UN is shown to be
helpless in the face of this situation
but when must remember that the UN is
also important in uh the symbolism of
politics and it has had a dramatic
effect on the uh peoples of the world
and the outrage that has uh that Israel
has encountered throughout the world for
undertaking this kind of
indiscriminate and massive
violence accompanied by uh
Draconian uh restrictions on the uh
importation of food electricity the fuel
and water so it is an outrage that in
the digital age confronts people
everywhere in real time and the
UN plays a role and the Secretary
General was acting
actually uh in full Accord with his
responsibility as the highest
administrative official in relation to
the UN Charter so the Israeli outrage
against him is just one more display of
repudiation of international Authority
all right I mean let me put that then to
to Raphael Raphael Antonio gues says the
Grievances of the Palestinian people
cannot justify the appalling attacks by
Hamas and those appalling attacks cannot
justify the collective punishment of the
Palestinian people it seems a fairly
evenhanded thing to say why has that
provoked such Fury a furious response
from
Israel well first of all I am in entire
agreement with Mr Utes the Secretary
General of the United Nations when he
said that the assault of the Hamas on
Israel was not in a vacuum and uh it's
very very very true uh because the
vacuum was filled by
the incitement from Iran behind the
Hamas there is Iran there are the
Russians the Chinese a lot of power uh
Qatar is involved Qatar is sometimes
involved in a humanitarian way but
sometimes it supports the Hamas it's a
little ambiguous so right right really
no vacuum on the contrary the sea is
full of of sharks the sea is full of
dangerous animals that are pushing and
helping the Hamas with Weaponry with
money Etc
okay okay but why that Furious response
from Israel when Antonio gutterz says he
wants a humanitarian you wants a
humanitarian ceasefire for the innocent
people Palestinians in Gaza why Israel
is so angry about
that uh no we're angry at the the vacuum
story more than at the humanitarian
ceasefire because the the VAC story in a
way is legitimating and justifying
Terror and I sincerely hope and it's
already being prepared that Mr gz will
appear in court International court and
he will be judged and possibly condemn
normal normally what he said is a six
month suspended
sentence jail sentence because he has
openly and publicly as a public person
all right encouraged and uh
terrorism but on the other side the
ceasefire the humanitarian part I want
to say one thing right away okay we the
Israeli people have no hatred and no
grudge towards the Palestinian people we
want Palestinian children women innocent
civilians to be safe and we want them
out of the combat zone because combat
there will be and it will be a violent
combat and we point an accusing finger
to The Intern
community and especially to Egypt and to
most Arabic countries Egypt is closing
its borders to Palestinian civilians
that could be in refugee camps it has
now accepted to do refugee camp in the
south of Gaza and I'm still waiting to
see from Qatar from Saudi Arabia a plane
or a private yacht take onean child out
of the combat zone Point second rapael
thank you I mean Chris there's not much
um I mean is the UN Security Council
really going to be the best Forum to
eventually get a ceasefire when you know
a fairly un fairly typical view from
Israel is what you're just hearing there
from
rapael the clear answer is no and that's
why it should probably go to the general
assembly in a uniting for peace type
action which is what happens when the
Security Council is hamstrung but if I
may just reply to what rapael was saying
about the secret General's comments if
you read what the secret General has
said what he is saying is that the
context is a the blockade of Gaza which
has gone on since 2007 in its most
restrictive form to the occupation of
Palestinian land which began in 1967
with its Associated settler violence
which has increased with this farite
settler Coalition um which is headed by
which was headed by Mr netan yahu and
thirdly Mr guz is referring to the uh
dispossession of the Palestinians in
1948 and the wholesale dismantlement of
pal Palestinian society which drove
750,000 refugees from their homes they
either fled or they were forced to flee
their homes and actually those are the
three underlying causes of this conflict
which need to be addressed if the
Israelis are Israeli civilians are to
live free from fear and neurosis and
anxiety and if the Palestinians are not
to be isolated and blockaded and
radicalized and brutalized anymore so
let's look at what the Secretary General
has said and let's look positively on it
as a way of addressing the underlying
causes this Hamas violence has a cause
and contextualizing it is not to justify
it trying to explain it um is in no way
any attempt to stand by and defend it so
let's not just reject what the highest
Diplomat in the world is saying and as
Richard would put it um Israel must not
just FL was just reject the authority of
the world Community let's engage Raphael
with some of these ideas because that is
the way to Future peace for Israelis and
for Palestinians and when I look at what
the brave people of Southern Israel are
saying those people who've had their
children kidnapped they're the ones who
are saying I don't want a single life to
be lost in the name of my kidnapped or
my murdered child they are in the the
Forefront of the search for peace and
people on Rafael's side of the conflict
need to listen to what that constituency
is saying they are crying out for peace
and those are the people the Israelis
who are on the border with Gaza who have
lost the most all right Rafael I'll come
back to you in a moment but Richard
first of all because we're trying to
focus on the un's uh role here is the
security Council going to be the best
Forum to get a
ceasefire well I don't think it's a
feasible Forum because of the uh
geopolitical
determination of giving Israel
unconditional support by the US France
and the UK such a situation
paralyzes uh the UN Security Council and
the organization was created to give
this kind of geopolitical power and it's
a sad moment when it is
appreciated that the worst of
international crimes can
unfold while the world is watching and
the UN is rendered
helpless I think the uniting for peace
resolution approach via the general
assembly is a desirable one and a
necessary one but uh I would expect uh
Israel to be as arrogant and defiant as
it has been toward other aspects effect
of un and international legal
Authority Raphael there obviously
enormous Fury uh amongst Israelis at
what Hamas was able to get away with on
October the 7th is some of that furing
attempt is some of the anger at the UN
and attempt to deflect the frustrations
that of what hamus was able to get away
with uh first of all there is no fury on
part of the Israeli people just sadness
we are a people of Peace the fury is the
Hamas the killing the cruelty is theas
we are people of Peace but we have to
defend ourselves and if you think that
the International Community is not with
us you're mistaken and the United
Nations if they want to sue us then they
will have to sue president macron was of
France was here yesterday he renewed his
support and his spot of the coalition
similar to the Coalition fighting Isis
fighting Das so if we do our job and our
job is before any ceas fire is to reach
one objective which will reach quickly
is an annihilate theas destroy the Kamas
forever and free Gaza from the Kamas
rule but if you want to tell us off uh
because of doing this you're going to
have to sue the French the British the
Free World
the Americans because they're all in it
with
us now when rapael you've been in
Israeli intelligence long enough to know
that militarily you are never going to
be able to wipe out Hamas I mean what is
the endgame in
G watch us you know how many times we
were told that we can't do it in the six
day Wars in anbe and we did it just
watch us we have a surprise in store but
this is military I just want to continue
of two points that you mention
one is the legitimacy of the Secretary
General of the United
Nations which he has lost forever by
supporting terrorism but I would also
accuse some another un
institution uh of complic to be an
accomplice of terrorism is unra unra in
Gaza is cooperating with the terrorist
is not protecting the civilians as it
should and he's
teaching children children Palestinian
children hatred and killing the Jews and
sacrificing and shahim and Jihad and
brainwashing I accuse the United Nations
of being an accomplice to terrorism and
I will finish by saying only one thing
just one thing and I'm finished I
promise uh there you talking about the
occupation we have evacuated Gaza years
and years ago and that's when theas went
into the vacuum the vacuum that you're
talking about the has filled it and we
are not present militarily or any other
way in Gaza for years and years and
years and and I finish now we have given
a lot a lot thousands and thousands of
work permits for gazan workers to come
and work in Israel for gazan students to
go abroad and we have let merchandise go
into Gaza more and more so we have been
the only real humanitarian and economic
help to Gaza is Israel the first donor
to Gaza is Israel all right well Chris
I'll have to let you come back and that
you've spent long enough in Gaza to
explain the role of the UN there I'll
let you come back yeah yeah can I just
work backwards through some of Raphael's
completely mendacious tropes first of
all this idea that Israel has left as
soon as Israel left it imposed a
blockade and the idea that it's been
generously allowing guest workers into
um Israel to work can I say that one of
the untold stories of what's happened in
the last couple of weeks is the
thousands of pales inian guest workers
from Gaza who have been incarcerated and
locked up we don't know where they are
we don't know what's happened them we
have some idea but there's a huge untold
story there about thousands of workers
who were simply doing a job when the war
started and they've just been rounded up
and locked up the idea that Raphael was
saying that the Secretary General is
supporting terrorism honestly Raphael
people will listen to that and simply
laugh at all your other ideas some of
which I think are perfectly reasonable
to accuse the secret general of being a
criminal and of being someone who
supports terrorism that simply won't
resonate with anyone it's condemnable
that you can make these comments about
the world's top Diplomat who's working
tily along with his superb staff to
bring peace to your part of the world as
for your comments on unra as unra
spokesman for 15 years I dealt with this
lie time and time again we had uh people
who would film Hamas schools where
indeed there were summer camps and other
things which were teaching um extremism
to to children we investigated every
single one of those and we showed that
they were all a pack of Lies simly
during the Gaza war in 2014 when
militants put rockets in our schools
when we found them that the schools had
been moth B for the summer when we found
these rocket components the first people
we told pretty much were the Israelis we
had no credit for that instead we were
told the narrative went out from M regab
at the time and others that other
Israeli spokespeople that unra was coll
collaborating with terrorists in order
to send Rockets into Israel all of these
anti-un unra troes about unra supporting
terrorism have all been fully
investigated and their complete lies and
a very last point about international
support for Israel if you actually
listen to the global South the billions
of people in the global South for them
this is the last anticolonial struggle
the last vestiges of the anti-colonial
struggles from the 19th century this is
the last struggle against white people
throwing Brown people off their land and
if you look at what's capable what
brings people onto the streets today
there are three or four issues there's
black Liv matter there's the MEO
movement there's Global there's climate
change and the Palestinians and Rishi
sunak and Biden they better listen
because they're all under threat from
their electorates and the street the
people of on the planet are very much
standing with the Palestinians in
Palestinians in their anticolonial
struggle okay uh Richard we'll just talk
quickly about what the UN is trying to
do now there be going to be another
security council meeting while we're uh
while this program is on air they want
to the US has called for a pause in the
fighting and Russia wants a humanitarian
ceasefire help us understand what the
difference is and what you would like to
see I would like to see a cessation of
the violence alog together uh and a
humanitarian
ceasefire is something that is generally
understood as a pra allude to political
negotiations and Hamas is elected
remember that Hamas Hamas is a political
actor that has committed terrorist acts
in its attack of October 7th but the
idea of
eradicating a political actor because it
has committed an act of
terrorism would apply to many
governments incl ining that of Israel
and is a very dangerous Doctrine and as
it's being implemented in the violence
that we've witnessed so far it has uh
jeopardize the lives of thousands and
thousands of innocent Palestinian people
including several thousand Palestinian
children it it is a great tragedy and
catastrophe about which the UN as an
organization cannot do anything
effective so long as these Western
Powers block it from opposing the
continuation of this uh Onslaught on the
Palestinian people all right Chris
there's going to be an after when Israel
decides it's done as much as it can in G
a what's it going to need the UN for
then frankly everything it's going to
need the UN in a humanitarian sense and
that really puts unra center stage and
that means unra has to be properly
funded even before this current crisis
on the 7th of October unra was over a
hundred million short for its regular
programs um and it's since issued a
flash appeal for over 100 million so yes
it will need the UN but it will need
onra the world will need unra but unra
needs to be properly funded by the world
unra is the other huge service provider
um apart from the Hamas authorities um
unra has Engineers it has health workers
it has teachers it has psychosocial
supporters in the community it has a
broad range of Social Services that is
it offers and those are going to have to
be be massively ramped up if there's if
we're going to avoid a humanitarian
catastrophe which frankly we're in the
midst of as I said 600,000 people have
taken refuge in un schools schools which
are designed for a thousand kids during
the day and then to be emptied out at
night so there's a massive task for anra
in just emptying out its schools um but
beyond that there's going to be a huge
um rebuilding and rehabilitation program
again this is the fifth war that unra in
Gaza that unra has lived through so unra
has experience in doing this on the
Diplomatic front it's really difficult
to know what the way forward will be um
because you've had Israel arrogantly uh
condemning the Secretary General
completely unjustifiably but again the
UN will come to into its Zone because
it's going to be the place where all the
parties are able together there is to
talk together there is no other Forum so
you know if the UN didn't exist
something like it would have to be
invented if unra didn't exist something
like it would have to be invented but we
have to get away from this idea of
Israel and its American Cher is simply
being able to reject the UN that is not
going to work in the postwar
dispensation okay okay uh um uh Richard
turkey's president Reb type erdogan says
he's saddened by the un's inability to
agree to a resolution regarding Gaza he
wants reform of the security Council
it's not the first time he's called for
that but also Brazil's president Lula D
Silva says what's happening now in the
UN is exposing the weakness of the UN do
you do you see those recognize those
calls of a need to reform of how the UN
operates I I do but I don't think the
political conditions will will allow
that reform to take place precisely
because these Powers don't want to give
up their capacity to paralyze the
organization if its uh
prescriptions go contrary to their
strategic interests and this is a
shocking example where uh the leading
Democratic
constitutional governments of the world
are overtly
endorsing the
most uh heus of crimes that unfold day
by day in Gaza and have uh committed the
worst crimes that have been uh shown to
the world in since World War
II it's a shocking moment
all right and thanks to all our guests
to Richard folk and Chris Gunners and to
rapael Jerusalem who joined us earlier
and thank you too for watching you can
see the program again anytime by
visiting our website aljazeera.com and
for further discussions go to our
Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insid story you can
also join the conversation on X we are
at AJ inside story from me Bernard Smith
and the whole team here bye
[Music]